yes good evening and welcome to viewers
on bebés appeared in the Rose Garden in
Downing Street a short while ago to give
his reaction to all the controversy
around his decision to travel hundreds
of miles to his parents home with his
family during the lockdown so plenty for
us to discuss and it'll be interesting
to say the least to see what Boris
Johnson has to say following the
statement by Dominic Cummings earlier
mr. Cummings by the way pretty
unrepentant saying he had no regrets
about the decision he'd made he didn't
believe he'd broken the rules or the
spirit of the rules and he certainly
hadn't considered resigning so there was
clarity around his position certainly
although as we are beginning to hear
there are quite a few party colleagues
of his and others who were less than
happy with the message that he gave so
we're waiting for the prime minister to
appear in the meantime let's go to
Downing Street and outside is our
political correspondent Iain Watson in
let's just think about the kind of
questions that the Prime Minister will
face following that statement by Dominic
Cummings I think undoubtedly is going to
face a question of tone of contrition
many people have been unable to see
loved ones some of lost loved ones
during the lockdown he was asked did he
have any regrets he said he did not
regret the way they had handled this he
had not offered his resignation he did
not intend to offer his resignation and
he said there were exceptional
circumstances in the rules that allowed
him to effectively temporarily relocate
along with his sick wife
250 miles to Durham so I'm really sorry
I'm going to draft you because the Prime
Minister is ready to speak welcome to
the number-10 coronavirus press
conference before I turn to this
evening's announcements I want to update
you on the latest data three million
five hundred and thirty two thousand six
hundred and thirty-four tests for
coronavirus have now been carried out in
the UK including seventy three thousand
seven hundred and twenty six tests
carried out yesterday two hundred sixty
one thousand one hundred eighty four
people who have tested positive and
that's an increase of 1600
and 25 cases since yesterday eight
thousand eight hundred and thirty four
people are in hospital with coded 19 in
the UK and that Stan
toll percent from ten thousand and
ninety two this time last week
and sadly of those who tested positive
for coronavirus across all settings 36
thousand nine hundred and fourteen have
now died that's an increase of one
hundred and twenty one fatalities since
yesterday in this new figure includes
deaths in all settings not just in
hospitals and once again my deepest
condolences go out to all those who have
lost their loved ones before their time
and we must and we will not forget them
two weeks ago I set out our roadmap for
the next phase in our fight against
kovat 19 and it's a cautious plan
informed by the evidence about what is
safe and it's conditional upon our
continual progress against the virus and
we are making progress thanks to this
country's collective efforts the key
indicators are heading in the right
direction the daily number of deaths is
done the number of new cases is down our
survey evidence suggests the infection
rate is falling and the r has not risen
above 1 so just over two weeks ago we
moved to step one of our plan
encouraging those who are unable to work
from home to go back to work with new
guidelines setting out how workplaces
can be made co vid secured at the same
time we allowed people to spend more
time outdoors at a meet one member of
another household outside provided they
remain two metres apart I also said we
will be able to move to step two of our
plan no earlier than Monday the 1st of
June a week today we will set out our
formal assessment of the five tests that
we set for adjusting the lockdown later
this week
as part of the three weekly review we
are legally required to undertake by
Thursday but because of the progress we
are making I can with confidence put the
British people on notice of the changes
we intend to introduce as we move
interceptive and I think it's important
to give that notice so that people have
sufficient time to adjust and get ready
before those changes come into effect
yesterday I set out our intention to
begin reopening nurseries and particular
years in primary schools reception year
1 year 6 from the 1st of June followed
by some contact for those secondary
school pupils with exams next year from
the 15th of June some contact for year
years 10 and 12 from the 15th of June
with that with their teachers this
announcement has given schools teachers
and parents clarity about our intentions
enabling them to prepare in earnest the
Department for Education is now engaging
with teaching unions councils and school
leaders to help schools get ready today
I want to give the retail sector notice
of our intentions to reopen shops so
they too can get ready so I can announce
that it is our intention to allow
outdoor markets to reopen from June the
1st subject to all premises being made
Co bid secured as well as car showrooms
which often had significant outdoor
space and where it is generally easier
to apply social distancing we know that
the transmission of the virus is lower
outdoors and that it is easier to follow
kovat secure guidelines in open spaces
that means we can allow we can also
allow outdoor markets to reopen in a
safe way that does not risk causing a
second wave of the virus then from the
15th of June we intend to allow all
other
nonessential retail ranging from
department stores to small independent
shops to reopen again this change will
be contingent upon progress against the
five tests and will only be permitted
for those retail premises which are
coded secure today we are publishing new
guidance for the retail sector detailing
the measures they should take to meet
the necessary social distancing and
hygiene standards shops now have the
time to implement this guidance before
they reopen this will ensure there can
be no doubt about what steps they should
take while the vast majority of
businesses will want to do everything
possible to protect their staff and
customers I should add that we will of
course have the powers we need to
enforce compliance where that is
required I want people to be confident
that they can shop safely provided they
follow the social distancing rules for
all premises the food retail sector has
already responded fantastically well
enabling supermarkets to be kept open in
a safe way and we will learn lessons
from that experience as we allow other
retail to open these are careful but
deliberate steps on the road to
rebuilding our country and we can only
take these steps thanks to what we have
so far achieved together we will only be
successful you'll only be successful if
we all remember the basics so wash your
hands keep social distance and isolate
if you have symptoms and get a test I'm
not going to hand over to Yvonne Doyle
medical director of public health
England to take us through today
Thank You Prime Minister so we have
several slides here and the first one is
about what's going on in the population
so you can see here in the yellow circle
that point two five percent of the
population is the average proportion of
the community that had the infection in
a particular week which was the fourth
to the 17th
me now this this work is produced
through estimates but also through a
household sampling survey undertaken by
the Office for National Statistics and
that tells us also that a hundred and
thirty seven thousand people in the
community in that week were likely to
have the infection this is some time ago
in any week recently sixty one thousand
might have been infected there is a
range in that but that is a fairly
stable figure and that leads us to look
at the the so-called reproduction of the
virus between people and you can see how
that works there if the reproduction is
three then for every person three others
and three more and three more and that
becomes very quick and fast in the
community however if the reproduction is
one much of course much less so if it's
below one even less than that somebody
meets several people before any
transmission occurs and this is good
news and at the moment the estimate is
that the reproduction is between point
seven and one could I have the next
slide please so this shows us the
testing which is always of interest and
the testing at the moment shows as the
prime minister had said the three and a
half million tests have been done in
total and on a daily basis recently the
tests have been around 73,000 74,000 and
correlating with that we have the
confirmed cases here and the confirmed
cases on the 25th of May were 16 just
over 1,600 and in total that leaves us
with two hundred and sixty one thousand
over two hundred and sixty one thousand
tests in that period from the 21st of
March to the 25th of May but you can see
the trend here is downwards this is a
seven day rolling average because
weekends we do have fewer tests
confirmed and fewer tests taken thank
you could I have the next slide so the
hospital data continued to give us good
news and this is very important because
this shows
really how many very ill people there
could be in the community who need
admission and the number of admissions
estimated with the disease on the 23rd
of May was 595 that's daily and that's
down considerably and that's good news
but also those who are most unwell in
ITU in on mechanical ventilators that's
a decline of 15 percent from the 17th of
May so we now have 12 percent of people
on mechanical ventilation and you can
see here the four countries showing
broadly the same trend it in smaller
numbers that does vary but you can see
with England it's a fairly firm downward
trend so this is good news for the
population could I have the next slide
please and then we're looking at this by
region and there are regional variations
and we can see here where London has a
very distinctive curved epidemic curve
and that is because London was first
really to experience this epidemic in
early to mid March and the other regions
perhaps followed on and the devolved
administration's so that's why you're
seeing mainly why you're seeing
different patterns in the various
regions but the trend is mainly
downwards the numbers are small in
certain regions such as smaller in the
southwest of course in Wales so there is
more perhaps oscillation flatness there
but you can see in the areas which have
had large numbers of cases there is a
definite downward trend could I have the
next slide please
and certainly here are the deaths a
hundred and twenty one deaths occurred
on the 25th of May this trend is also
downwards it's very welcome that the
trend is downwards it remains a very
tragic event which really touches all of
us every day however I do want to point
out that it does vary at weekends as
well and bank holidays may show
particular downward trends but we need
to be prepared that this were not quite
true this
yet but altogether thirty six thousand
nine hundred people have died from
covert disease who have had a positive
test and I think that is the last slide
thanks very much Yvonne let's go to our
questions both from the public and from
the media will go first to Stuart from
Selby good afternoon
if UK travelers returning from abroad
they're going to be told them a self
isolate for 14 days what actual capacity
will exist for health officials to
perform spot checks and will the
government's be in showing those people
self isolating receive food and medical
essentials during this time thank you
well thank you I'll go to Yvonne for the
ability of health officials to to do to
do spot checks in in a minute but as to
what well what we're trying to do is to
make sure that from June yet when the
when the the measures come into effect
that people can we no longer have people
coming into this country who can as it
were reinfect of the UK after you've
made this huge effort to reduce
infections and and get the iodine so
that's the reason for the the quarantine
system we hope it will be bearable we
hope that people understand why it's
it's necessary and we will take every
every steps to ensure that we make
things as as manageable as possible I
cannot tell you what provision we've yet
made for people self isolating whether
they will receive food and and
provisions I think it possibly it would
be reasonable to assume as they come
into the UK knowing the rules that they
will they will take steps to self
isolate somewhere where they can make
sure that they are provided for but
obviously if they can't then local
authorities are ready and to to make
sure that they are there well looked
after it won't you won't say anything
about the about our ability to get to
carry out checks Thank You Prime
Minister sue Stuart we've been working
hard over the recent month since we set
up our contact
singing advisory service in March on a
trial basis and we're now working to
connect that and it will connect with
the various places that people will need
follow-up and will need support and
contact tracing now we've had some
experience of this considerably in the
contain phase between January and March
where our colleagues were very much
connected with the ports and the border
force we were able to ascertain people
who were not well when they were coming
in and to follow those up and that
system will continue to be the case
where people are unwell or they we are
concerned then we would certainly want
to follow them up through our contact
tracing service and we are working with
the one of the airports to look at other
ways that perhaps checks can be done
through the airport it has to be
effective it isn't always possible to
ascertain people who don't have symptoms
who may be about to develop them as far
as supporting people when they're
actually isolating we have got inform in
this in looking after people who are
particularly vulnerable those who are
shielding and those who are not able to
go out and get what they need and that
system really is one that needs to imbue
into the follow up of people who are
very vulnerable so this system will be
set up to connect maximally and we will
be testing that from June thanks so much
everyone we're going to Claire from hop
ndon and Claire's question is since the
restrictions have been lifted there are
large groups gathering in local parks
ignoring all social distancing rules
when many of us are being so vigilant
and staying alert what can be done to
discourage this blatant disregard for
the rules well Claire I'm again I'm
gonna hand over to to Yvonne to talk a
little bit about transmission outdoors
but I let me just say that it is
absolutely vital that all of us continue
to observe the rules on social
distancing on washing our hands as and
making sure that we have symptoms that
we we self isolate get a test as we go
forward and the only reason we've been
able to make
much progress as we have the only reason
I'm able to announce that were able
finally to begin getting schools back to
begin getting retail back from the 1st
of June is because this country has
observed the social distancing rules so
Claire what I would say is obviously you
should feel free to speak to people
yourself if you feel that they're not
obeying the rules but the police will
step in if necessary and encourage
people to obey the law Prime Minister
just to say clear thank you for the
prompt here to say that what we're doing
going forward very much depends on a
partnership between the population and
the unlocking process that were trying
to support to happen
this isn't about going back to the way
everybody lived before it is a
responsibility socially to distance to
not go out if unwell to remember that
this virus can reappear and therefore it
is important that people maintain the
basic hygiene and distancing rules that
are there and we're dependent on this on
a voluntary basis we want people to
understand that this is the way we will
be living for some time thank you very
much Yvonne we go to the media we go
first Elora Coons Berg of the BBC Thank
You Prime Minister and you promised
people maximum transparency
you knew your chief adviser had gone
against the spirits of the lockdown
rules where they're driving 30 miles to
a local beauty spot when he was in
County Durham supposedly to test his
eyesight or not self isolating
straightaway when his wife had symptoms
in fact he returned to work at Downing
Street when she was falling ill Dominic
Cummings would not express any regrets
about any of that this afternoon do you
well first of all let me just tics
repeat what you heard earlier on today
which is that it's absolutely true that
I didn't I didn't know about any of the
arrangements in advance what I think did
happen was while I was ill and about to
get a lot sicker we had a brief
conversation in which I think
Donna Lee Cummings mentioned where he
was but I have to tell you Laura at that
particular stage I had a lot on my plate
and really didn't focus on the matter
until the story started to emerge in the
last in the last few days so my answer
to your question is is you know do I do
I do I regret what is what has happened
and yes of course i i i i I do regret
the confusion and the anger and the pain
that people feel because as Yvonne has
just been saying this is a country
that's been going through the most
tremendous difficulties and suffering
and in the course of the last ten weeks
and that's why I really did want people
to understand exactly what had happened
and that's why you know you mentioned
openness and transparency or I thought
it was important that you know I tried
yesterday to to explain my version of
what I heard from from Dominic Cummings
but you know obviously I couldn't go
into it in all the detail that I know
that you will want to hear and I think
that the public actually needed to hear
and so that's why we had the the
statement and the the very extensive
questions that we did today thank you
very much Laura can we go to Robert
Peston of ITV News and you have heard
yesterday the long account that Dominic
Cummings gave us today of his reasons
for driving 260 miles to Darwin
inevitably it leaves some questions
unanswered so his main reason he said
for driving to Durham was because of
protests outside his house but of course
in full lockdown the risk of those
protests is reduced perhaps to nil so it
seems a slightly odd reason I wondered
if you'd asked him about that and
secondly his excursion to Barnard Castle
30 miles again seemingly breaking the
rules was to test his eyesight to see if
he could drive back to London but why
didn't his wife Mary Wakefield who
better than he was drive back to London
or why didn't you just lay off all the
government lay honor a car given his
importance well they're coming Robert
you're right you're a formidable
journalists and and and there's a very
good questions but I have to tell you
that to the best of my knowledge mr.
Cummings has just subjected himself to
to your interrogation for quite a long
time now about these very detailed
matters and has reduced quite a
substantial chunk of autobiography about
what happened in in in the period from
the 27th of March to the 14th of April I
really feel that it would be wrong with
me to try to to comment further on you
know what he said I think people will
have to make their minds up I think he
spoke a great length to me he came
across somebody who cared very much
about his family and who's doing the
best for his for his family I think as
he said himself a reasonable people may
disagree about some of the decisions
that he took but I don't think
reasonable people can disagree about
what was going through his head at the
time and the motivations for those for
those decisions and as I say my my
conclusion is that I think he acted
reasonably legally and as I said
yesterday with integrity and with care
for his family and and for others so I
think those other questions you should
direct with respect to to mr. Cummings
and you had quite a lot quite a good
that today can we go to bed
Rigby from from Sky News
yes Thank You Prime Minister many people
who also really love their families made
huge sacrifices that you asked them to
make in this national effort and for
many people mr. Cummings account of why
he appeared to break lockdown rules
simply won't be good enough your own
scientific advisers have said buyback in
him you're undermining your government's
key public health message at a time of
crisis are you compromising the
government's response to this pandemic
because you can't cope in number 10
without mr. Cummings I will thank you
for for that Beth I just want to I mean
the most important thing in all this is
to repeat our message and you know
you're absolutely right to dwell on that
and with the only reason we can make
progress as a country the only reason
that we're able to get this disease
under control the only reason that we've
got the numbers of deaths down and the
numbers of infections down and so that
we're actually in a position with our
track and trace and isolate operation
really to to deal with it is because
people have obeyed the guidelines you
had an extensive opportunity to to talk
earlier on to hear earlier on about how
a member of my staff tried to obey the
guidelines and I think you've you you've
you know I heard your questions there
and I thought they were they were good
an apposite
I really can't add anything to those
people will have to make up their own
minds what I will say is it's absolutely
vital it's absolutely vital that people
continue to observe the government's
public health message and continue to
observe the guidelines and and I do
think one thing that is in danger of
getting lost in much of this and people
think it's banal but it's so bares
repeating the single best thing you can
do to stop transmission of this virus
and to prevent yourself being infected
by it is to is to wash your hands and to
wash your hands
repeatedly and that I'm afraid is one
message that I are going to keep
repeating throughout this crisis thank
you very much Beth can we go to Lucy
Fisher of the times please minister is
your backing for Dominic Cummings
unconditional or if it does become clear
that he's undermining compliance with
public health messaging are you prepared
to revisit this decision I'm of course
no I can't give any unconditional
backing to anybody but I do not believe
that anybody in number 10 has done
anything to undermine our our messaging
what we want to make absolutely clear to
the public is that the only way to solve
this problem is if we stay alert follow
the guidelines control the virus and
save lives and that is being immensely
effective so far
we're coming now to a difficult you know
a more difficult change of gears we're
going to be reopening some retail then
more retail in the course of the coming
month were asked we're asking schools
gradually to reopen it is absolutely
vital in this period that we continue to
observe social distancing washing our
hands isolating ourselves if we have
symptoms and I know that the common
sense of the British people will will
get us through could we go to Rowena
Mason of the Guardian please hi Minister
I am expecting millions of people around
the country to believe that Dominic
Cummings needed to take a 60 mile round
trip to a local beauty spot with his
wife and child just to test his eyesight
and secondly Conservative MPs at least
20 of them senior clergy scientists
medics lawyers are many many
constituents from across the political
spectrum all believe that mr. Cummings
should quit for his actions are they all
wrong well I can't go in to really go
back over what you've heard this
afternoon but on the point about
eyesight I might just say I'm finding
what I have to wear spectacles for the
first time in in in years because of I
think because of the effects of this
thing so I'm inclined to think there's
some some I think that that's very very
plausible that there's a that eyesight
can be a problem associated with with
coronavirus on on your on your point
about credibility and you know I think
people asking for for resignations I
understand why people may wish to see to
see resignations but I think that people
will make up their make up their minds
about what mr. Cummings had to say and
you know I you know I note that the
Guardian I think on Saturday had a
headline which was police spoke to
Cummings about lock down and as far as I
know that is certainly not the case
and you know if you I think it's
important for us all to stick to the
facts as far as we possibly can
Rowena can we go to Sam Lister of the
Express Thank You Prime Minister
um Dominic Cummings said that mistakes
have been made in the handling of the
coronavirus crisis but it was for the
government to explain I'm sure you must
have discussed those with you I wonder
if you can tell us what they are and
also a new announcement today many
people would be really pleased that
shops are reopening and would you
encourage people who are financially
able to get out and spend to revive the
economy well Sam I think the short
answer is yes I think insofar as people
can get out and enjoy themselves in the
in the open air as we will begin from
the 1st of June as they can make use of
open-air shopping car car showrooms and
I'm certainly not going to discourage
them from spending at all and I think
that you know it's it's it's early days
but we're very much hoping that there
will be a bounce-back
over the course of the next few months
so I think the short answer to your
question is yes absolutely so sorry
forgive me the your first question on
the mistakes made during the coronavirus
crisis well yes I mean thank you Sam
look I mean I I saw that the Dom
referred I think that to me saying I
think the reality is that this is a
country in a government that has been
like every other country and government
around the world in trying to cope with
an absolute unprecedented virus a plague
that has had economic social behavioral
psychological and the health
consequences unlike anything that we've
seen in the last 70 years and it's it's
obliged us as a country to impose
restrictions to ask people to do things
in a way that you know not even happen
didn't even happen
during the Second World War it's been a
quite extraordinary time for this
country and for any government to say
that it hasn't learnt anything as it
goes along wouldn't you know it doesn't
think that there are important ways in
which we would won't want to prepare
better for the next time of course
that'd be absolute folly to say that but
what I would say Sam is that when I look
at what this country has achieved in
getting the virus under control in
reducing in protecting the NHS stopping
that from being overwhelmed making sure
every patient had a ventilated bed and
that was the the the the real threat
that we saw at the beginning wrapping
our arms around every worker in this
country with the further scheme again
something completely unlike anything
other countries have done an achieved at
record speed by HMRC and and our Civil
Service I really think when I look at
what the what the local authorities what
the national government what the civil
service or the NHS have achieved over
the last 10 weeks I think we have great
cause to be very very proud of the way
those public servants have responded and
there will still be challenges ahead
I've absolutely no doubt about it but we
will continue to learn and improve where
we can every step of the way there in a
spirit of of complete humility anyway
thank you very much Sam and thank you
all very much for listening this evening
thank you well there we are the scene
live in Downing Street Boris Johnson
lead
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dovecote UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News
you